Project Title
Please provide a descriptive name your project
Towards a neural marker of complex meaning construction

Page 2: International collaborators and grant questions
Brief abstract
Provide a brief summary of the proposed project written for an audience of non-experts. This summary
may be used in public promotional materials. (limited to 250 words)

Human language is capable of conveying a vast number of ideas. At the core of this expressive power is the principle of semantic compositionality: the meaning of an utterance is determined by the meanings of its parts. How do we infer complex ideas from others’ utterances? In a recent study, using intracranial recordings from the surface of the human brain (electrocorticography or ECoG), we found that neural activity increases monotonically over the course of a sentence across the language system. Having ruled out a number of alternative explanations of this effect in terms of generic attention and cognitive load, we argued that this response increase reflects the increasing complexity of the evolving representation of the sentence meaning and is thus a candidate neural marker of complex meaning construction. Although ECoG is a powerful method with high spatial and temporal resolution, only a few patients undergo this procedure, making data collection slow, and the coverage of the brain is limited, making it difficult to understand the language system as a whole. Here, we propose to use magnetoencephalography (MEG) – a sensitive non-invasive technique which provides whole-brain coverage and can be used in neurotypical individuals – to probe sentence comprehension, including complex meaning construction, in greater detail. In particular, building on our pilot collaborative work, we here aim to validate the first language “localizer” for MEG, and identify a neural marker of sentence construction, laying an important foundation for discovering the precise sequence of computational and neural events that underlie sentence interpretation.


Description of collaboration (if applicable)
Provide a brief history of the collaboration and describe how your work is complementary. (limited to 250
words)
Our collaboration started in 2018, when we decided to combine efforts to develop a functional “localizer” for language-responsive areas for MEG. XXX’s lab has pioneered the functional localization approach for language in fMRI. Unlike the traditional approach, where individual brains are averaged together in the common space, this approach takes into account the well-established inter-individual variability in the precise locations of functional areas, conferring higher sensitivity and functional resolution, and allowing for straightforward comparisons of findings across individuals, studies, and labs as needed to establish a cumulative research enterprise. Furthermore, understanding inter-individual variability in the neurotypical population can shed light on the nature of pathologies in neurological disorders. In terms of methodological expertise, XXX brings her knowledge of individual-subject analyses, and YYY – her MEG expertise (training at the University of Cambridge, UK, & the MRC Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit as a postdoctoral fellow in 2016-17). On the theoretical side, XXX has been investigating language comprehension for the last 17 years, and YYY has spent her graduate and postdoctoral years studying semantic processing at the level of single concepts, in both neurotypical individuals and individuals with neurodegenerative disorders. MEG data on the functional localizer paradigm adapted from XXX’s fMRI work have already been collected in Dutch and English. YYY visited the XXX Lab in April-May 2019 (funded by the Research Foundation Flanders) to set up a common pre-processing and analysis pipeline with the help of BBB (MIT) and perform preliminary data analyses. The second visit is tentatively planned for spring 2020, pending funding.

Description of the proposed project
Describe in detail the proposed project. Funding may be used to cover travel and meeting costs to
facilitate international projects and collaboration. Funds may not be used to cover salaries or materials
and long-term stays. Please include any technical information that will help scientific reviewers in your
field evaluate the proposal. Please review the guidelines and eligibility from our website. (limited to 1500
words)


Core researchers:
Rose YYY, Postdoctoral research fellow, KU Leuven (Belgium)
Rik ZZZ, Professor, KU Leuven (Belgium)
Ev XXX, Asst Professor, MIT
Eghbal AAA, Graduate Student, MIT
Dimitrios BBB, Research Scientist, MIT

Sentence comprehension occurs rapidly, and can only be understood at a mechanistic level by discovering the precise sequence of underlying neural events. This project will illuminate the computations that support sentence interpretation, with a focus on complex meaning construction, by combining a) magnetoencephalography (MEG), a technique with high temporal resolution and whole-brain coverage, with b) the power of individual-subject analyses, which take into account the well-established variability in the precise locations of functional areas. MEG has been gaining popularity in cognitive neuroscience but is still vastly underused in language research. Individual-subject analyses yield increases in sensitivity, while at the same time improving the interpretability of the results and facilitating comparisons across studies and labs. Thus this combined approach, which has only been previously used in the domain of vision (Liu et al., 2001), holds substantial promise for language research.

XXX et al. (2010) developed a robust and replicable approach to identifying language-responsive brain regions in individual participants using fMRI. They then established that these language-responsive areas are highly selective for processing linguistic input (e.g., XXX et al., 2011) and support both single-word comprehension and combinatorial processing (e.g., XXX et al., 2012, 2019), placing constraints on the computations that take place in these circuits. However, a major limitation of fMRI is its low temporal resolution (seconds). In 2016, XXX and colleagues extended the functional localization approach to electrocorticography (ECoG) and discovered an intriguing phenomenon: an increase in gamma power (70-170Hz) over the course of a sentence. Having ruled out a number of alternative explanations of this effect in terms of generic attention and cognitive load, they argued that this increase reflects the increasing complexity of the evolving representation of the sentence meaning and is thus a candidate neural marker of complex meaning construction. In principle, this discovery opens the door to probing real-time linguistic computations related to semantic interpretation using novel paradigms, but ECoG is invasive and data are scarce. As a result, we propose to use MEG, which can track neural activity at a millisecond resolution across the whole brain non-invasively in neurotypical participants, to tackle the fundamental question of how meaning is extracted from the linguistic signal.

The specific aims of the project are: 1) to validate the first individual-participant language “localizer” for MEG (in Dutch and English), and 2) identify a neural marker of sentence construction. Further, given the success of the functional localization approach in fMRI, which has now been adopted by dozens of labs in the US, Europe, and Asia, we expect that this approach will find wide resonance in the MEG field, and that the language localizer paradigm will become a key paradigm in MEG language research. Materials and scripts will be made available online

Forty young right-handed neurotypical participants (20 Dutch speakers, 20 English speakers) will perform an adapted version of the language localizer paradigm (XXX et al., 2010). The task consists of two conditions: reading sentences and reading sequences of nonwords (80 trials per condition, 12 words/nonwords each). The sentences>nonwords contrast targets areas that support lexico-semantic and combinatorial (semantic and syntactic) processing. The sentences are constructed so as to use a variety of syntactic structures and cover a wide range of topics. The nonwords are created by replacing some phonemes in real words to create phonotactically legal (and thus pronounceable) strings. At the end of each sentence or nonword string, participants are asked to decide whether a probe word or nonword appeared in the preceding trial by pressing a button. This task ensures engagement, which is especially important in the nonwords condition. The materials are presented one word/nonword at a time in the center of the screen (385ms each), for the total duration of ~20 min. Continuous MEG data are recorded using a whole-head 306 channel (102 magnetometers, 204 planar gradiometers) Triux system (Elekta Neuromag, Helsinki, Finland) at the CUB Hôpital Erasme (Brussels, Belgium) for the Dutch experiment and at the Martinos Imaging Center (MIT) for the English experiment. So far, 19 Dutch-speaking volunteers (age 19-29), and 5 English-speaking volunteers (age 18-23) have participated in this experiment. Preprocessing consists of low-pass bandpass filtering at 300 Hz and removal of eye blinks and heartbeats using ICA. The preprocessing pipeline was automated during RB’s first research stay in the XXX Lab (in April-May 2019).

Primary analyses will be performed in sensor space and will follow the general approach from XXX et al., 2010. Processing will be performed using Brainstorm, an open-source MEG analysis toolbox which was co-developed by BBB. First, we will establish that using MEG, we are able to robustly identify language-responsive regions at the single-participant level and demonstrate that the increase in sensitivity using the individual-subjects functional localization approach compared to a traditional group-level analysis (separate analyses will be performed for magnetometers and gradiometers). To do this, we will run the data through two parallel analysis streams. In both streams, the data in each individual will be divided in half (odd- vs. even-numbered trials, as in XXX et al., 2010). We will directly evaluate the stability of the language responses within individuals across time and across frequency bands (i.e., between the odd- vs. even-numbered trials). We will do this in two ways: a) by identifying sensors that show a significant sentences>nonwords effect (at some fixed significance threshold) in each half of the data and computing the overlap between these relative to the sum of all sensors showing a significant sentences>nonwords effect; and b) by correlating the size of the sentences>nonwords effect across all sensors within each individual between the two halves of the data. Further, in the individual-subjects stream, the data from the odd-numbered trials will be used to define sensors of interest in each participant individually. In particular, we will take the 10% sensors that show the sentences>nonwords effect most robustly. In the group-analysis stream, the data from the odd numbered trials will be averaged across participants, and the top 10% of sensors will be defined based on this group map. Then, in the critical step, the responses to the sentences and nonwords conditions will be extracted from the even-numbered trials using the participant-specific sensors of interest (in the individual-subjects stream) or the group-level sensors of interest (in the group-analysis stream). The effect sizes will then be compared between these two approaches. Third, among the language-responsive sensors, we will search for sensors that show an activity increase over the course of the sentence, as we found in ECoG (see also Hultén et al., 2019, for a report of such a signal in MEG language data). Again, this search will be performed using the odd-numbered trials (exploring different frequency bands), and tested in the even-numbered trials. Language-responsive sensors, including a subset that potentially show the sentence “build-up” effect, will be visualized as topographical maps. Finally, similar analyses will be conducted in source space (minimum norm imaging, dSPM).

Preliminary analyses (on the Dutch speakers; n=19) have yielded promising results: language responses (i.e., sentences>nonwords effects) were significantly larger when sensors were selected at the individual level compared to the group level (paired t-tests: magnetometers p=0.0005, gradiometers p=0.00001). The sentences>nonwords effect was stronger using the individual sensor selection vs. the group-level selection in 18/19 subjects for magnetometers, and in 17/19 for gradiometers. In a ~quarter of the subjects, using the group-level sensor selection, activity was actually higher for nonwords than for sentences (5/19 for magnetometers and 3/19 for gradiometers), clearly demonstrating that selecting sensors at the group level can largely miss language-responsive areas in a substantial proportion of participants. Finally, the sentences>nonwords effect sizes in the language-responsive sensors were compared between the odd and even trials. When selecting sensors at the individual level, the correlation between the two halves of the dataset was ~0.4, whereas it was ~0.1 at the group level. These absolute values are were similar to the correlations reported for the fMRI version of the paradigm (XXX et al., 2010, Fig 9). These preliminary results already confirm that language-responsive sensors can be robustly identified at the individual level. Thus, this approach holds substantial promise for future MEG work on language comprehension.

Next, we will focus on identifying a neural marker of complex sentence construction as described above. If this step is successful (which is likely given suggestions of this kind of an effect in prior MEG studies; Lam et al., 2016; Hultén et al., 2019), we are planning a series of experiments to probe the process of semantic composition further. In particular, we will vary the properties of the linguistic stimuli, including their length (to determine when the semantic build-up effect may asymptote), their syntactic well-formedness (e.g., see Mollica et al., 2019, for fMRI evidence that semantic dependencies are formed even when the syntactic structure of a sentence is degraded), the lexico-semantic features of the individual words and the relationships among them, etc. These MEG studies will be accompanied by parallel behavioral investigations of similar materials in patients with neurological diseases as a result of stroke or degeneration, to shed light on the language architecture by understanding the changes in language processing following brain damage.



Exchanges and activities planned, including student participation
Describe in detail the exchanges and activities planned. (faculty and student exchanges, workshops,
meetings) (limited to 250 words)
YYY’ next visit to MIT is planned for spring 2020 (5 weeks). XXX and/or AAA will visit Leuven in the summer of 2020 (1-2 weeks). During these visits, the team will focus on data analysis, writing up the results, and preparing new grant applications. During the MIT visit, a workshop focusing on MEG investigations of semantic composition is planned. During the KU Leuven visit, we will organize a symposium about MEG for language research. Throughout the duration of the project, YYY will actively supervise MEG analyses conducted in the XXX Lab and participate in lab meetings. The team will hold skype meetings every 2-3 weeks to touch base on progress.


In this current or proposed collaboration, what other additional activities are planned outside
of the seed funding?
Describe additional activities and how they will be funded (NSF, etc.) (limited to 250 words)
YYY has been and will continue to be involved in training XXX’s staff in analyzing MEG data. YYY and AAA will apply to conferences (e.g., Society for Neuroscience, Society for the Neurobiology of Language, Cognitive Neuroscience Society) to present preliminary findings.


Project sustainability
After MISTI seed funding, how will the project continue? (limited to 250 words)
This MISTI-KU Leuven project is scientifically novel and exciting and will enable us to advance our collaboration and allow us to seek extramural funding in the next two years.
A joint publication is currently in preparation. XXX and YYY plan to submit two grants (one to NSF/NIH, and one to a Belgian or EU funding agency) for MEG projects that would build on the foundation laid by the studies described above. YYY is currently the only Belgian researcher using MEG in language research and aims to expand this MEG research line at KU Leuven in the near future. In the US, only a handful of labs (e.g., at NYU, CMU, MGH) use MEG to study language processing. XXX’s involvement in this project will add MIT to this list.
